# ENSP 338 Research assignment

The purpose of this assignment is for you to research a topic of
interest to you and determine its potential to make a positive impact on our
electrical energy system.

There are two components to this

1) An analysis of the costs and benefits of your topic or proposal

2) A recommendation with the aim of convincing policy makers to consider
your topic as an serious option for inclusion in a building, or other
electrical energy system.


## Milestones

We will break up the assignment in to parts

1) Brainstorm a list of possible topics on your own.  Feel free to send
them to me if you would like feedback.  This is to get you thinking.

2) Settle on a topic and specific questions you want to answer in the
course of your research.  You will then propose these in a very short ~2
minute presentation to the class.  Due Monday, October 7th in class.

3) After you have settled on a topic, you will compose a short proposal
for the research.  Proposals are written to obtain funding and resources
for projects.  In this case, you are writing a proposal to research you
proposed improvement.  Your proposal will explain your topic, why it is
important, and what specific questions you want to answer, and brief
details about how you will answer them.  A one-page typed proposal is due
Monday, October 21st in class.

4) You will prepare a written report and recommendation.  The five page
typed report is due Monday, December 2nd in class.

5) You will present your work in class explaining your topic, your
methods, and your recommendation.  This presentation will be
approximately 10 minutes long and will be held in class on December 2nd
4th and 9th, depending on how much time is needed.

## Groups

You may work in groups of two if you like.  Your group must be decided
by the time you submit the abstract.

## Null Result

It is not important when you choose the topic that it will have clear
benefits.  You may find during the course of your research that your
topic does not have very compelling benefits.  The recommendation may
then be that your policy not be pursued or that more research is
necessary to determine the true benefit.

