syllabus/338-syllabus-template.md, before:

# Electrical Energy Management, ENSP 338, Fall 2014


|           |                                       |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|
|Days       | Monday and Wednesday                  |
|Time       | 2:00 - 3:50 pm                        |
|Units      | 4                                     |
|Location   | Environmental Technology Center (ETC) |
|Instructor | Daniel Soto                           |
|Office     | Rachel Carson Hall 12                 |
|Email      | sotod@sonoma.edu                      |

## Course Description
An overview of energy management approaches in residential and
commercial settings that involve electrical devices, including lighting,
motors, and HVAC. Fundamentals of electricity, electric power delivery,
and the workings of common appliances; energy economics.

<!-- 2014: revise learning objectives -->

## Learning Objectives
- Understand and apply principles of electricity
- Exposure to existing electricity infrastructure
- Calculate cost and energy impacts of electrical efficiency measures


## Course Requirements
This course assumes a solid background in algebra, trigonometric
functions, and physics.  There will be biweekly homework assignments
that will have both quantitative and qualitative tasks.  Students should
come to class having completed the assigned reading and be ready to perform
guided problem solving during class.  Students will complete a research
project at the end of the class and give a written report and
presentation that integrates what they have learned in the class.


## Grading
- Classroom work (quizzes, participation) 25%
- Homework (problem sets, readings) 25%
- Exams (midterm, final) 25%
- Research project 25%

## Agreements

- Respectful tone in classroom

Civility is required from all students during discussions and
interactions.  In general, I expect students to be supportive of each
others learning goals.

- Minimize electronic distractions

Internet-connected electronic devices (phones, tablets) may be used in
class for learning purposes.  Using devices for social networks or other
uses during class time is strongly discouraged.

- Willingness to take risks and experiment

I frequently try new approaches to teaching and learning.  These are
always with the intention of making this class as beneficial to you as
possible.


## Course Schedule

We will begin with the basics of electrical theory and investment
theory, giving us a foundation for estimating circuit behavior and the
financial costs of technologies.  We will then cover practical aspects
of utilities and the way we sell electricity.  We'll next cover AC
and three-phase electricity and safety.  We cover the main loads that
electricity power which are lighting and motors.  We will cover both
theory and practical aspects of each of these.  The course will end with
optional topics that will include smart grid technology and climate
impacts of electricity.

{{ d['course-schedule.md'] }}

## Readings

The required text for this course is:

Gil Masters, *Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems*, 2nd
Edition.  Available at Northlight Books.
There is also an online version of the text available on the Sonoma
Library website.

There will also be readings posted to Moodle throughout the
semester.  Graded reflection assignments will be assigned for posted
readings and will be included in your homework grading average.

Here is the tentative reading schedule

{{ d['reading-schedule.md'] }}

## Project Schedule

You will investigate a project in teams.
You will choose a question related to electrical energy
and then use techniques from this class to create estimates.
The learning goals are for you to explore relevant topics in electrical
energy use in ways similar to professional work.
There will be a separate document that explains the expectations for the
project that I will hand out in a few weeks.

The tentative project schedule is listed here:

{{ d['project-schedule.md'] }}

## Homework

You will be graded both on the
validity of your work as well as your ability to communicate your
methods.  This means that in addition to the mathematics, you should be
providing brief explanations of your techniques and your thought
process.

I will be experimenting with various homework assessment
and feedback techniques throughout the semester.  Please have faith that
these experiments have improving your learning as the main goal.

The tentative homework schedule is listed here:

{{ d['homework-schedule.md'] }}

## Classroom Work

We will often perform individual and group work in class.  These may
take the form of writing exercises, group exercises, or quizzes.
If you have
an unexcused absence on the day of work, you will not receive credit for
that day's assignment.

## Office Hours
Signup is online and can be accessed
through my website at [danielrsoto.com](http://danielrsoto.com)


## University Policies

There are important University policies that you should be aware of,
such as the add/drop policy; cheating and plagiarism policy, grade
appeal procedures; accommodations for students with disabilities and the
diversity vision statement.  Go to this URL to find them.
[http://www.sonoma.edu/uaffairs/policies/studentinfo.shtml](http://www.sonoma.edu/uaffairs/policies/studentinfo.shtml)

Commit message:

updates syllabus with final exam and HW5M due date

syllabus/338-syllabus-template.md, after:

# Electrical Energy Management, ENSP 338, Fall 2014


|           |                                       |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|
|Days       | Monday and Wednesday                  |
|Time       | 2:00 - 3:50 pm                        |
|Units      | 4                                     |
|Location   | Environmental Technology Center (ETC) |
|Instructor | Daniel Soto                           |
|Office     | Rachel Carson Hall 12                 |
|Email      | sotod@sonoma.edu                      |

## Course Description
An overview of energy management approaches in residential and
commercial settings that involve electrical devices, including lighting,
motors, and HVAC. Fundamentals of electricity, electric power delivery,
and the workings of common appliances; energy economics.

<!-- 2014: revise learning objectives -->

## Learning Objectives
- Understand and apply principles of electricity
- Exposure to existing electricity infrastructure
- Calculate cost and energy impacts of electrical efficiency measures


## Course Requirements
This course assumes a solid background in algebra, trigonometric
functions, and physics.  There will be biweekly homework assignments
that will have both quantitative and qualitative tasks.  Students should
come to class having completed the assigned reading and be ready to perform
guided problem solving during class.  Students will complete a research
project at the end of the class and give a written report and
presentation that integrates what they have learned in the class.


## Grading
- Classroom work (quizzes, participation) 25%
- Homework (problem sets, readings) 25%
- Exams (midterm, final) 25%
- Research project 25%

## Agreements

- Respectful tone in classroom

Civility is required from all students during discussions and
interactions.  In general, I expect students to be supportive of each
others learning goals.

- Minimize electronic distractions

Internet-connected electronic devices (phones, tablets) may be used in
class for learning purposes.  Using devices for social networks or other
uses during class time is strongly discouraged.

- Willingness to take risks and experiment

I frequently try new approaches to teaching and learning.  These are
always with the intention of making this class as beneficial to you as
possible.


## Course Schedule

We will begin with the basics of electrical theory and investment
theory, giving us a foundation for estimating circuit behavior and the
financial costs of technologies.  We will then cover practical aspects
of utilities and the way we sell electricity.  We'll next cover AC
and three-phase electricity and safety.  We cover the main loads that
electricity power which are lighting and motors.  We will cover both
theory and practical aspects of each of these.  The course will end with
optional topics that will include smart grid technology and climate
impacts of electricity.

{{ d['course-schedule.md'] }}

The final exam will be held on Monday December 8th from 2:00 pm - 3:50
pm in the ETC.

## Readings

The required text for this course is:

Gil Masters, *Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems*, 2nd
Edition.  Available at Northlight Books.
There is also an online version of the text available on the Sonoma
Library website.

There will also be readings posted to Moodle throughout the
semester.  Graded reflection assignments will be assigned for posted
readings and will be included in your homework grading average.

Here is the tentative reading schedule

{{ d['reading-schedule.md'] }}

## Project Schedule

You will investigate a project in teams.
You will choose a question related to electrical energy
and then use techniques from this class to create estimates.
The learning goals are for you to explore relevant topics in electrical
energy use in ways similar to professional work.
There will be a separate document that explains the expectations for the
project that I will hand out in a few weeks.

The tentative project schedule is listed here:

{{ d['project-schedule.md'] }}

## Homework

You will be graded both on the
validity of your work as well as your ability to communicate your
methods.  This means that in addition to the mathematics, you should be
providing brief explanations of your techniques and your thought
process.

I will be experimenting with various homework assessment
and feedback techniques throughout the semester.  Please have faith that
these experiments have improving your learning as the main goal.

The tentative homework schedule is listed here:

{{ d['homework-schedule.md'] }}

## Classroom Work

We will often perform individual and group work in class.  These may
take the form of writing exercises, group exercises, or quizzes.
If you have
an unexcused absence on the day of work, you will not receive credit for
that day's assignment.

## Office Hours
Signup is online and can be accessed
through my website at [danielrsoto.com](http://danielrsoto.com)


## University Policies

There are important University policies that you should be aware of,
such as the add/drop policy; cheating and plagiarism policy, grade
appeal procedures; accommodations for students with disabilities and the
diversity vision statement.  Go to this URL to find them.
[http://www.sonoma.edu/uaffairs/policies/studentinfo.shtml](http://www.sonoma.edu/uaffairs/policies/studentinfo.shtml)
